Upload MMS fine-tuning (#1243)
huggingface/blog: mms_adapters.md

Meta AI's most recent release, [**Massive Multilingual Speech (MMS)**](https://ai.facebook.com/blog/multilingual-model-speech-recognition/) by *Vineel Pratap, Andros Tjandra, Bowen Shi, et al.* takes multi-lingual speech representations to a new level. Over 1000 spoken languages can be identified, transcribed and generated with the [language identification, speech recognition, and text-to-speech checkpoints that were released](https://huggingface.co/models?other=mms).

![wav2vec2_structure](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patrickvonplaten/scientific_images/master/mms_map.png)

**MMS** unsupervised checkpoints were pre-trained on more than **half a million** hours of audio in over **1400** languages, ranging from 300 million to one billion parameters.

You can find the pretrained-only checkpoints on the 🤗 Hub for model sizes of 300 million parameters (300M) and one billion parameters (1B):

-   [**MMS-300M**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-300m)
-   [**MMS-1B**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b)

> Similar to [BERT's masked language modeling objective](http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-bert/), XLS-R learns contextualized speech representations by randomly masking feature vectors before passing them to a transformer network during self-supervised pre-training.

Reviewer: `XLS-R learns` -> `wav2vec2 learns`

Author: Thanks corrected!

> Similar to [BERT's masked language modeling objective](http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-bert/), XLS-R learns contextualized speech representations by randomly masking feature vectors before passing them to a transformer network during self-supervised pre-training.

Author: ```suggestion
Similar to [BERT's masked language modeling objective](http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-bert/), MMS learns contextualized speech representations by randomly masking feature vectors before passing them to a transformer network during self-supervised pre-training.
```

**MMS**'s released three checkpoints fine-tuned for speech recognition (ASR) that have 102, 1107, and 1162 adapter weights respectively (one for each language):

-   [**MMS-1B-FL102**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-fl102)
-   [**MMS-1B-L1107**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-1107)
-   [**MMS-1B-ALL**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all)

You can see that the base models are saved (as usual) as a [`model.safetensors` file](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all/blob/main/model.safetensors), but in addition these repositories have many adapter weights stored in the repository, *e.g.* under the name [`adapter.fra.safetensors`](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all/blob/main/adapter.fra.safetensors) for French.

The Hugging Face docs explain very well how such checkpoints can be used for inference [here](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/mms#loading), so in this blog post we will instead focus on learning how we can efficiently train highly performant adapter models based on any of the released ASR checkpoints.

## Training adaptive weights

> In machine learning, adapters are a method used to fine-tune pre-trained models while keeping the original model parameters unchanged. They do this by inserting small, trainable modules, called adapter layers, between the pre-existing layers of the model, which then adapt the model to a specific task without requiring extensive retraining.

Reviewer: 'adapters are a method' -> '[adapters](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1902.00751.pdf) are a method'

> In machine learning, adapters are a method used to fine-tune pre-trained models while keeping the original model parameters unchanged. They do this by inserting small, trainable modules, called adapter layers, between the pre-existing layers of the model, which then adapt the model to a specific task without requiring extensive retraining.

Author: ```suggestion
In machine learning, adapters are a method used to fine-tune pre-trained models while keeping the original model parameters unchanged. They do this by inserting small, trainable modules, called [adapter layers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1902.00751.pdf), between the pre-existing layers of the model, which then adapt the model to a specific task without requiring extensive retraining.
```

Adapters have a long history in speech recognition and especially **speaker recognition**. In speaker recognition, adapters have been effectively used to tweak pre-existing models to recognize individual speaker idiosyncrasies, as highlighted in [Gales and Woodland's (1996)](https://www.isca-speech.org/archive_v0/archive_papers/icslp_1996/i96_1832.pdf) and [Miao et al.'s (2014)](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ymiao/pub/tasl_sat.pdf) work. This approach not only greatly reduces computational requirements compared to training the full model, but also allows for better and more flexible speaker-specific adjustments.

The work done in **MMS** leverages this idea of adapters for speech recognition across different languages. A small number of adapter weights are fine-tuned to grasp unique phonetic and grammatical traits of each target language. Thereby, MMS enables a single large base model (*e.g.*, the [**MMS-1B-ALL**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all) checkpoint) and 1000+ small adapter layers (2.5M weights each for **MMS-1B-ALL**) to comprehend and transcribe multiple languages. This dramatically reduces the computational demand of developing distinct models for each language.

> Great! Now that we understood the motivation and theory, let's look into fine-tuning adapter weights for **MMS-1B-ALL** 🔥

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can also consider to link to one of our PEFT/LoRA posts.

Great, now we can use 🤗 Datasets' simple API to download the data. The dataset name is `"mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1"`, the configuration name corresponds to the language code, which is `"tr"` in our case.

**Note**: Before being able to download the dataset, you have to access it by logging into your Hugging Face account, going on the [dataset repo page](https://huggingface.co/datasets/mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1) and clicking on "Agree and Access repository"

Common Voice has many different splits including `invalidated`, which refers to data that was not rated as "clean enough" to be considered useful. In this notebook, we will only make use of the splits `"train"`, `"validation"` and `"test"`.

Because the Turkish dataset is so small, we will merge both the validation and training data into a training dataset and only use the test data for validation.

```python
from datasets import load_dataset, load_metric, Audio

common_voice_train = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="train+validation", use_auth_token=True)

> common_voice_test = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="test", use_auth_token=True)

Author: Yeah I got an error otherwise, maybe cc @lhoestq

> common_voice_test = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="test", use_auth_token=True)

Author: This is indeed different to `from_pretrained(...)` afaik

> common_voice_test = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="test", use_auth_token=True)

Reviewer 2: Completely not important for this PR, but the documentation made me think it wouldn't be necessary: https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.13.0/en/package_reference/loading_methods#datasets.load_dataset

```
use_auth_token (str or bool, optional) — Optional string or boolean to use as Bearer token for remote files on the Datasets Hub. If True, or not specified, will get token from "~/.huggingface".
```

> common_voice_test = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="test", use_auth_token=True)

Author: Actually this looks to be an issue in the CV datasets scripts themselves - will open an issue

> common_voice_test = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "tr", split="test", use_auth_token=True)

Author: https://github.com/huggingface/datasets/issues/5968

```python
from transformers import Wav2Vec2Processor

processor = Wav2Vec2Processor(feature_extractor=feature_extractor, tokenizer=tokenizer)
```

Next, we can prepare the dataset.

### Preprocess Data

So far, we have not looked at the actual values of the speech signal but just the transcription. In addition to `sentence`, our datasets include two more column names `path` and `audio`. `path` states the absolute path of the audio file and `audio` represent already loaded audio data. MMS expects the input in the format of a 1-dimensional array of 16 kHz. This means that the audio file has to be loaded and resampled.

Thankfully, `datasets` does this automatically by calling the other column `audio`. Let try it out.

```python
common_voice_train[0]["audio"]
```

```bash
    {'path': '/root/.cache/huggingface/datasets/downloads/extracted/71ba9bd154da9d8c769b736301417178729d2b87b9e00cda59f6450f742ed778/cv-corpus-6.1-2020-12-11/tr/clips/common_voice_tr_17346025.mp3',
     'array': array([ 0.00000000e+00, -2.98378618e-13, -1.59835903e-13, ...,
            -2.01663317e-12, -1.87991593e-12, -1.17969588e-12]),
     'sampling_rate': 48000}
```

> In the example above we can see that the audio data is loaded with a sampling rate of 48kHz whereas 16kHz are expected by the model. We can set the audio feature to the correct sampling rate by making use of [`cast_column`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=cast_column#datasets.DatasetDict.cast_column):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example above we can see that the audio data is loaded with a sampling rate of 48kHz whereas the model expects 16kHz, as we saw. We can set the audio feature to the correct sampling rate by making use of [`cast_column`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=cast_column#datasets.DatasetDict.cast_column):
```

-   Evaluation metric. During training, the model should be evaluated on the word error rate. We should define a `compute_metrics` function accordingly

-   Load a pretrained checkpoint. We need to load a pretrained checkpoint and configure it correctly for training.

-   Define the training configuration.

After having fine-tuned the model, we will correctly evaluate it on the test data and verify that it has indeed learned to correctly transcribe speech.

### Set-up Trainer

Let's start by defining the data collator. The code for the data collator was copied from [this example](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/7e61d56a45c19284cfda0cee8995fb552f6b1f4e/examples/pytorch/speech-recognition/run_speech_recognition_ctc.py#L219).

> Without going into too many details, in contrast to the common data collators, this data collator treats the `input_values` and `labels` differently and thus applies to separate padding functions on them (again making use of MMS processor's context manager). This is necessary because in speech input and output are of different modalities meaning that they should not be treated by the same padding function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without going into too many details, in contrast to the common data collators, this data collator treats the `input_values` and `labels` differently and thus applies two separate padding functions on them (again making use of MMS processor's context manager). This is necessary because, in speech recognition, input and output are of different modalities so they should not be treated by the same padding function.
```

```python
model.init_adapter_layers()
```

Next, we freeze all weights, **but** the adapter layers.

```python
model.freeze_base_model()

adapter_weights = model._get_adapters()
for param in adapter_weights.values():
    param.requires_grad = True
```

In a final step, we define all parameters related to training.
To give more explanation on some of the parameters:

-   `group_by_length` makes training more efficient by grouping training samples of similar input length into one batch. This can significantly speed up training time by heavily reducing the overall number of useless padding tokens that are passed through the model
-   `learning_rate` was chosen to be 1e-3 which is a common default value for training with Adam. Other learning rates might work equally well.

For more explanations on other parameters, one can take a look at the [docs](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/main_classes/trainer.html?highlight=trainer#trainingarguments).
To save GPU memory, we enable PyTorch's [gradient checkpointing](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/checkpoint.html) and also set the loss reduction to "*mean*".

> MMS adapter fine-tuning converges extremely fast to very good performance, so even for a dataset as small as 4h we will only train for 4 epochs. Training should

Author: ```suggestion
MMS adapter fine-tuning converges extremely fast to very good performance, so even for a dataset as small as 4h we will only train for 4 epochs.
```

| 4.905 |  100  | 0.215| 0.280 |
| 0.290 |  200  | 0.167 | 0.232 |
| 0.2659 |  300  | 0.161 | 0.229 |
| 0.2398 |  400  | 0.156 | 0.223 |

The training loss and validation WER go down nicely.
**Note:** Fine-tuning adapter layers of `mms-1b-all` for just 100 steps outperforms fine-tuning the whole `xls-r-300m` checkpoint shown [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-xlsr-wav2vec2#training-1) already by a large margin.

The adapter weights will be uploaded as part of the model checkpoint, but we also want to make sure to save them seperately so that they can easily be off- and onloaded.

Let's save all the adapter layers into the training output dir so that it can be correctly uploaded to the Hub.

```python
from safetensors.torch import save_file as safe_save_file
from transformers.models.wav2vec2.modeling_wav2vec2 import WAV2VEC2_ADAPTER_SAFE_FILE
import os

adapter_file = WAV2VEC2_ADAPTER_SAFE_FILE.format(target_lang)
adapter_file = os.path.join(training_args.output_dir, adapter_file)

safe_save_file(model._get_adapters(), adapter_file, metadata={"format": "pt"})
```

Finally, you can upload the result of the training to the 🤗 Hub.

```python
trainer.push_to_hub()
```

> One of the main advantagehs of adapter weights training is that the "base" model which makes up roughly 99% of the model weights is kept unchanged and only a small [2.5M adapter checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-turkish-colab/blob/main/adapter.tur.safetensors) has to be shared in order to use the trained checkpoint.

Reviewer: `advantagehs` -> `advantages`

> One of the main advantagehs of adapter weights training is that the "base" model which makes up roughly 99% of the model weights is kept unchanged and only a small [2.5M adapter checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-turkish-colab/blob/main/adapter.tur.safetensors) has to be shared in order to use the trained checkpoint.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the main advantages of adapter weights training is that the "base" model which makes up roughly 99% of the model weights is kept unchanged and only a small [2.5M adapter checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-turkish-colab/blob/main/adapter.tur.safetensors) has to be shared in order to use the trained checkpoint.
```

> This makes it extremely simply to train additional adapter layers and add them to your repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes it extremely simple to train additional adapter layers and add them to your repository.
```

> You can do some very easily by simply re-running this script and changing the language you would like to train on to a different one, *e.g.* `swe` for Swedish. In addition, you should make sure that the vocabulary does not get completely overwritten but that the new language vocabulary is **appended** to the existing one as stated above in the commented out cells.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can do so very easily by simply re-running this script and changing the language you would like to train on to a different one, *e.g.* `swe` for Swedish. In addition, you should make sure that the vocabulary does not get completely overwritten but that the new language vocabulary is **appended** to the existing one as stated above in the commented out cells.
```

To demonstrate how different adapter layers can be loaded, I have trained and uploaded also an adapter layer for Swedish under the iso language code `swe` as you can see [here](https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-turkish-colab/blob/main/adapter.swe.safetensors)

> You can load the fine-tuned checkpoint as usual by using `from_pretrained(...)`, but you should make sure to also add a `target_lang="<your-lang-code>"` to the method so that the correct adapter is loaded. Also should you set the target language correctly for your tokenizer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can load the fine-tuned checkpoint as usual by using `from_pretrained(...)`, but you should make sure to also add a `target_lang="<your-lang-code>"` to the method so that the correct adapter is loaded. You should also set the target language correctly for your tokenizer.
```

Now it is very simple to change the adapter to Swedish by calling [`model.load_adapter(...)`](mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1) and by changing the tokenizer to Swedish as well.

```python
model.load_adapter("swe")
processor.tokenizer.set_target_lang("swe")
```

We again load the Swedish test set from common voice

```python
common_voice_test_swe = load_dataset("mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1", "sv-SE", data_dir="./cv-corpus-6.1-2020-12-11", split="test", use_auth_token=True)
common_voice_test_swe = common_voice_test_swe.cast_column("audio", Audio(sampling_rate=16_000))
```

and transcribe a sample:

```python
input_dict = processor(common_voice_test_swe[0]["audio"]["array"], sampling_rate=16_000, return_tensors="pt", padding=True)

logits = model(input_dict.input_values.to("cuda")).logits

pred_ids = torch.argmax(logits, dim=-1)[0]

print("Prediction:")
print(processor.decode(pred_ids))

print("\nReference:")
print(common_voice_test_swe[0]["sentence"].lower())
```

**Output**:

```bash
    Prediction:
    jag lemnade grovyobbet ot honom

    Reference:
    jag lämnade grovjobbet åt honom.
```

Great, this looks like an almost perfect transcription!

> We've shown in this blog post how MMS Adapter Weights fine-tuning not only gives state-of-the-art performance on low-resource languages, but also significantly speeds up training time and allows to easily build a collection of customized adapter weights.

Reviewer: Could we have a section called `Additional links` similar to https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all and add references to other MMS related links on HF.

**MMS**'s released three checkpoints fine-tuned for speech recognition (ASR) that have 102, 1107, and 1162 adapter weights respectively (one for each language):

-   [**MMS-1B-FL102**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-fl102)
-   [**MMS-1B-L1107**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-1107)
-   [**MMS-1B-ALL**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all)

You can see that the base models are saved (as usual) as a [`model.safetensors` file](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all/blob/main/model.safetensors), but in addition these repositories have many adapter weights stored in the repository, *e.g.* under the name [`adapter.fra.safetensors`](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all/blob/main/adapter.fra.safetensors) for French.

The Hugging Face docs explain very well how such checkpoints can be used for inference [here](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/mms#loading), so in this blog post we will instead focus on learning how we can efficiently train highly performant adapter models based on any of the released ASR checkpoints.

> ## Training adaptive weights

Author: Nice one. This section was the only one where Chat GPT helped haha

Great! Now that we understood the motivation and theory, let's look into fine-tuning a couple adapter weights for **MMS-1B-ALL** 🔥

## Notebook Setup

As done previously in the ["Fine-tuning XLS-R on Multi-Lingual ASR"](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-xlsr-wav2vec2) blog post, we fine-tune the model on the low resource ASR dataset of [Common Voice](https://huggingface.co/datasets/common_voice) that contains only *ca.* 4h of validated training data.

Just like Wav2Vec2 or XLS-R, MMS is fine-tuned using Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC), which is an algorithm that is used to train neural networks for sequence-to-sequence problems, such as ASR and handwriting recognition.

I highly recommend reading the well-written blog post [*Sequence Modeling with CTC (2017)*](https://distill.pub/2017/ctc/) by Awni Hannun.

Before we start, let's install `datasets` and `transformers`. Also, we need the `torchaudio` to load audio files and `jiwer` to evaluate our fine-tuned model using the [word error rate (WER)](https://huggingface.co/metrics/wer) metric \(( {}^1 \)).

```bash

> %%capture

Author: ```suggestion
%%capture
pip install --upgrade pip 
```

!pip install datasets[audio]
!pip install evaluate
!pip install git+https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.git
!pip install jiwer
!pip install accelerate
```

We strongly suggest to upload your training checkpoints directly to the [🤗 Hub](https://huggingface.co/) while training. The [🤗 Hub](https://huggingface.co/) has integrated version control so you can be sure that no model checkpoint is getting lost during training.

To do so you have to store your authentication token from the Hugging Face website (sign up [here](https://huggingface.co/join) if you haven't already!)

```python
from huggingface_hub import notebook_login

notebook_login()
```

## Prepare Data, Tokenizer, Feature Extractor

ASR models transcribe speech to text, which means that we both need a feature extractor that processes the speech signal to the model's input format, *e.g.* a feature vector, and a tokenizer that processes the model's output format to text.

> In 🤗 Transformers, the MMS model is thus accompanied by both a tokenizer, called [Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2ctctokenizer), and a feature extractor, called [Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2featureextractor).

Reviewer 3: Just swapping the order to match what's written above

```suggestion
In 🤗 Transformers, the MMS model is thus accompanied by both a feature extractor, called [Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2featureextractor), and a tokenizer, called [Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/model_doc/wav2vec2.html#wav2vec2ctctokenizer).
```

Let's start by creating the tokenizer to decode the predicted output classes to the output transcription.

> ### Create `Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer`

Reviewer 3: This section is explained well 👍 The new section on nesting the vocab dict is explained to the same level of detail as the copied content on building the tokenizer vocab, so I think we can safely assume it is pitched at the right level for our audience

Fine-tuned MMS models, such as [**MMS-1B-ALL**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all) already have a [tokenizer](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all/blob/main/tokenizer_config.json) accompanying the model checkpoint. However since we want to fine-tune the model on specific low-resource data of a certain language, it is recommended to fully remove the tokenizer, and vocabulary output layer and simply create a new ones based on the training data itself.

Remember that Wav2Vec2-like models fine-tuned on CTC transcribe an audio file with a single forward pass by first processing the audio input into a secquence of processed context representations and then using the final vocabulary output layer to classify each context representation to a character that reperesents the transcription.

The output size of this layer corresponds to the number of tokens in the vocabulary, and therefore only on the labeled dataset used for fine-tuning. So in the first step, we will take a look at the chosen dataset of Common Voice and define a vocabulary based on the transcriptions.

> For this notebook, we will use [Common Voice's 6.1 dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/mozilla-foundation/common_voice_6_1) for Turkish. Turkish corresponds to the language code `"tr"`.

Author: Think it's fine honestly. The later Common Voice are too large for Turkish to consider Turkish still low resource. Also too much work to update everything now

```

```python
vocab_train = common_voice_train.map(extract_all_chars, batched=True, batch_size=-1, keep_in_memory=True, remove_columns=common_voice_train.column_names)
vocab_test = common_voice_test.map(extract_all_chars, batched=True, batch_size=-1, keep_in_memory=True, remove_columns=common_voice_test.column_names)
```

Now, we create the union of all distinct letters in the training dataset and test dataset and convert the resulting list into an enumerated dictionary.

```python
vocab_list = list(set(vocab_train["vocab"][0]) | set(vocab_test["vocab"][0]))
```

```python
vocab_dict = {v: k for k, v in enumerate(sorted(vocab_list))}
vocab_dict
```

```bash
    {' ': 0,
     'a': 1,
     'b': 2,
     'c': 3,
     'd': 4,
     'e': 5,
     'f': 6,
     'g': 7,
     'h': 8,
     'i': 9,
     'j': 10,
     'k': 11,
     'l': 12,
     'm': 13,
     'n': 14,
     'o': 15,
     'p': 16,
     'q': 17,
     'r': 18,
     's': 19,
     't': 20,
     'u': 21,
     'v': 22,
     'w': 23,
     'x': 24,
     'y': 25,
     'z': 26,
     'ç': 27,
     'ë': 28,
     'ö': 29,
     'ü': 30,
     'ğ': 31,
     'ı': 32,
     'ş': 33,
     '̇': 34}
```

> Cool, we see that all letters of the alphabet occur in the dataset (which is not really surprising) and we also extracted the special characters `""` and `'`. Note that we did not exclude those special characters because:
> 
> The model has to learn to predict when a word is finished or else the model prediction would always be a sequence of chars which would make it impossible to separate words from each other.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cool, we see that all letters of the alphabet occur in the dataset (which is not really surprising) and we also extracted the special characters `""` and `'`. Note that we did not exclude those special characters because the model has to learn to predict when a word is finished, or else the model's prediction would always be a sequence of chars which would make it impossible to separate words from each other.
```

To make it clearer that `" "` has its own token class, we give it a more visible character `|`. In addition, we also add an "unknown" token so that the model can later deal with characters not encountered in Common Voice's training set.

```python
vocab_dict["|"] = vocab_dict[" "]
del vocab_dict[" "]
```

Finally, we also add a padding token that corresponds to CTC's "*blank token*". The "blank token" is a core component of the CTC algorithm. For more information, please take a look at the "Alignment" section [here](https://distill.pub/2017/ctc/).

```python
vocab_dict["[UNK]"] = len(vocab_dict)
vocab_dict["[PAD]"] = len(vocab_dict)
len(vocab_dict)
```

```bash
    37
```

Cool, now our vocabulary is complete and consists of 37 tokens, which means that the linear layer that we will add on top of the pretrained MMS checkpoint as part of the adapter weights will have an output dimension of 37.

> Since a single MMS checkpoint can provide customized weights for multiple languages, the tokenizer can also consist of multiple vocabularies. Therefore, we need nest our `vocab_dict` to potentially add more languages to the vocabulary in the future. The dictionary should be nested with the name that is used for the adapter weights and that is saved in the tokenizer config under the name [`target_lang`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/wav2vec2#transformers.Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer.target_lang).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since a single MMS checkpoint can provide customized weights for multiple languages, the tokenizer can also consist of multiple vocabularies. Therefore, we need to nest our `vocab_dict` to potentially add more languages to the vocabulary in the future. The dictionary should be nested with the name that is used for the adapter weights and that is saved in the tokenizer config under the name [`target_lang`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/wav2vec2#transformers.Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer.target_lang).
```

Let's use the ISO-639-3 language codes as is used for the original [**MMS-1B-ALL**](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all) checkpoint.

```python
target_lang = "tur"
```

Let's define an empty dictionary to which we can append the just created vocabulary

```python
new_vocab_dict = {target_lang: vocab_dict}
```

> **Note**: In case you want to use this notebook to add a new adapter layer to *an existing model repo* use make sure to **not** create an empty, new vocab dict, but instead re-use one that already exists. To do so you should uncomment the following cells and replace `mms_adapter_repo` with a model repo id to which you want to add your adapter weights.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note**: In case you want to use this notebook to add a new adapter layer to *an existing model repo* use make sure to **not** create an empty, new vocab dict, but instead re-use one that already exists. To do so you should uncomment the following cells and replace `"patrickvonplaten/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-turkish-colab"` with a model repo id to which you want to add your adapter weights.
```

```

Great, you can see the just created repository under `https://huggingface.co/<your-username>/wav2vec2-large-mms-1b-tr-colab`

### Create `Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor`

Speech is a continuous signal and to be treated by computers, it first has to be discretized, which is usually called **sampling**. The sampling rate hereby plays an important role in that it defines how many data points of the speech signal are measured per second. Therefore, sampling with a higher sampling rate results in a better approximation of the *real* speech signal but also necessitates more values per second.

A pretrained checkpoint expects its input data to have been sampled more or less from the same distribution as the data it was trained on. The same speech signals sampled at two different rates have a very different distribution, *e.g.*, doubling the sampling rate results in data points being twice as long. Thus,
before fine-tuning a pretrained checkpoint of an ASR model, it is crucial to verify that the sampling rate of the data that was used to pretrain the model matches the sampling rate of the dataset used to fine-tune the model.

> 
> MMS was pre-trained at a sampling rate of 16kHz. Common Voice, in its original form, has a sampling rate of 48kHz, thus we will have to downsample the fine-tuning data to 16kHz in the following.

Author: ```suggestion
```

```python
from transformers import Wav2Vec2Processor

processor = Wav2Vec2Processor(feature_extractor=feature_extractor, tokenizer=tokenizer)
```

Next, we can prepare the dataset.

### Preprocess Data

So far, we have not looked at the actual values of the speech signal but just the transcription. In addition to `sentence`, our datasets include two more column names `path` and `audio`. `path` states the absolute path of the audio file and `audio` represent already loaded audio data. MMS expects the input in the format of a 1-dimensional array of 16 kHz. This means that the audio file has to be loaded and resampled.

Thankfully, `datasets` does this automatically by calling the other column `audio`. Let try it out.

```python
common_voice_train[0]["audio"]
```

```bash
    {'path': '/root/.cache/huggingface/datasets/downloads/extracted/71ba9bd154da9d8c769b736301417178729d2b87b9e00cda59f6450f742ed778/cv-corpus-6.1-2020-12-11/tr/clips/common_voice_tr_17346025.mp3',
     'array': array([ 0.00000000e+00, -2.98378618e-13, -1.59835903e-13, ...,
            -2.01663317e-12, -1.87991593e-12, -1.17969588e-12]),
     'sampling_rate': 48000}
```

> Great, we can see that the audio file has automatically been loaded. This is thanks to the new [`"Audio"` feature](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=audio#datasets.Audio) introduced in `datasets == 4.13.3`, which loads and resamples audio files on-the-fly upon calling.

Reviewer 3: Latest release is 2.13 no? https://pypi.org/project/datasets/ Probably ok to omit this sentence since the audio feature is quite old now

> 
> Great, we can see that the audio file has automatically been loaded. This is thanks to the new [`"Audio"` feature](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=audio#datasets.Audio) introduced in `datasets == 4.13.3`, which loads and resamples audio files on-the-fly upon calling.

Author: ```suggestion
```

In the example above we can see that the audio data is loaded with a sampling rate of 48kHz whereas 16kHz are expected by the model. We can set the audio feature to the correct sampling rate by making use of [`cast_column`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=cast_column#datasets.DatasetDict.cast_column):

```python
common_voice_train = common_voice_train.cast_column("audio", Audio(sampling_rate=16_000))
common_voice_test = common_voice_test.cast_column("audio", Audio(sampling_rate=16_000))
```

Let's take a look at `"audio"` again.

```python
common_voice_train[0]["audio"]
```

    {'path': '/root/.cache/huggingface/datasets/downloads/extracted/71ba9bd154da9d8c769b736301417178729d2b87b9e00cda59f6450f742ed778/cv-corpus-6.1-2020-12-11/tr/clips/common_voice_tr_17346025.mp3',
     'array': array([ 9.09494702e-13, -6.13908924e-12, -1.09139364e-11, ...,
             1.81898940e-12,  4.54747351e-13,  3.63797881e-12]),
     'sampling_rate': 16000}

> This seemed to have worked! Let's listen to a couple of audio files to better understand the dataset and verify that the audio was correctly loaded.
> It looks like the data is now correctly loaded and resampled.
> 
> Let's do a final check that the data is correctly prepared, by printing the shape of the speech input, its transcription, and the corresponding sampling rate.

Reviewer 3: No listening going on!

```suggestion
This seemed to have worked! Let's do a final check that the data is correctly prepared, by printing the shape of the speech input, its transcription, and the corresponding sampling rate.
```

print("Input array shape:", common_voice_train[rand_int]["audio"]["array"].shape)
print("Sampling rate:", common_voice_train[rand_int]["audio"]["sampling_rate"])
```

```bash
    Target text: bağış anlaşması bir ağustosta imzalandı
    Input array shape: (70656,)
    Sampling rate: 16000
```

Good! Everything looks fine - the data is a 1-dimensional array, the sampling rate always corresponds to 16kHz, and the target text is normalized.

Finally, we can leverage `Wav2Vec2Processor` to process the data to the format expected by `Wav2Vec2ForCTC` for training. To do so let's make use of Dataset's [`map(...)`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes.html?highlight=map#datasets.DatasetDict.map) function.

First, we load and resample the audio data, simply by calling `batch["audio"]`.
Second, we extract the `input_values` from the loaded audio file. In our case, the `Wav2Vec2Processor` only normalizes the data. For other speech models, however, this step can include more complex feature extraction, such as [Log-Mel feature extraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum).
Third, we encode the transcriptions to label ids.

> **Note**: This mapping function is a good example of how the `Wav2Vec2Processor` class should be used. In "normal" context, calling `processor(...)` is redirected to `Wav2Vec2FeatureExtractor`'s call method. When wrapping the processor into the `as_target_processor` context, however, the same method is redirected to `Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer`'s call method.

Reviewer 3: `as_target_processor` is being deprecated - we should do this in a single forward call if possible:
```python
batch = processor(audio["array"], sampling_rate=audio["sampling_rate"], text=batch["sentence"])
```
(note that now we don't get the zero-th batch item with `input_values[0]`, so we need to modify the data collator (explained below)).

Alternatively, we can do:
```python
batch["input_values"] = processor(audio["array"], sampling_rate=audio["sampling_rate"]).input_values[0]
batch["input_length"] = len(batch["input_values"])

batch["labels"] = processor(text=batch["sentence"]).input_ids
```

            The processor used for proccessing the data.
        padding (:obj:`bool`, :obj:`str` or :class:`~transformers.tokenization_utils_base.PaddingStrategy`, `optional`, defaults to :obj:`True`):
            Select a strategy to pad the returned sequences (according to the model's padding side and padding index)
            among:
            * :obj:`True` or :obj:`'longest'`: Pad to the longest sequence in the batch (or no padding if only a single
              sequence if provided).
            * :obj:`'max_length'`: Pad to a maximum length specified with the argument :obj:`max_length` or to the
              maximum acceptable input length for the model if that argument is not provided.
            * :obj:`False` or :obj:`'do_not_pad'` (default): No padding (i.e., can output a batch with sequences of
              different lengths).
    """

    processor: Wav2Vec2Processor
    padding: Union[bool, str] = True

    def __call__(self, features: List[Dict[str, Union[List[int], torch.Tensor]]]) -> Dict[str, torch.Tensor]:
        # split inputs and labels since they have to be of different lenghts and need
        # different padding methods

>         input_features = [{"input_values": feature["input_values"]} for feature in features]

Reviewer 3: If we do one single processor call, then this needs to be updated to:
```diff
- input_features = [{"input_values": feature["input_values"]} for feature in features]
+ input_features = [{"input_values": feature["input_values"][0]} for feature in features]
```
to go from batched to un-batched

        label_features = [{"input_ids": feature["labels"]} for feature in features]

        batch = self.processor.pad(
            input_features,
            padding=self.padding,
            return_tensors="pt",
        )

>         with self.processor.as_target_processor():

Reviewer 3: Again, we shouldn't use this context

            labels_batch = self.processor.pad(
                label_features,
                padding=self.padding,
                return_tensors="pt",
            )

        # replace padding with -100 to ignore loss correctly
        labels = labels_batch["input_ids"].masked_fill(labels_batch.attention_mask.ne(1), -100)

        batch["labels"] = labels

        return batch
```

```python
data_collator = DataCollatorCTCWithPadding(processor=processor, padding=True)
```

Next, the evaluation metric is defined. As mentioned earlier, the

> predominant metric in ASR is the word error rate (WER), hence we will use it in this notebook as well.

Author: I'd classify this as common know ledge by now :sweat_smile:

> predominant metric in ASR is the word error rate (WER), hence we will use it in this notebook as well.

Author: Think it's fine - think that's common knowledge

```

The model will return a sequence of logit vectors:
 \(( \mathbf{y}_1, \ldots, \mathbf{y}_m \)) with \(( \mathbf{y}_1 = f_{\theta}(x_1, \ldots, x_n)[0] \)) and \(( n >> m \)).

A logit vector \(( \mathbf{y}_1 \)) contains the log-odds for each word in the vocabulary we defined earlier, thus \(( \text{len}(\mathbf{y}_i) = \)) `config.vocab_size`. We are interested in the most likely prediction of the model and thus take the `argmax(...)` of the logits. Also, we transform the encoded labels back to the original string by replacing `-100` with the `pad_token_id` and decoding the ids while making sure that consecutive tokens are **not** grouped to the same token in CTC style \(( {}^1 \)).

```python
def compute_metrics(pred):
    pred_logits = pred.predictions
    pred_ids = np.argmax(pred_logits, axis=-1)

    pred.label_ids[pred.label_ids == -100] = processor.tokenizer.pad_token_id

    pred_str = processor.batch_decode(pred_ids)
    # we do not want to group tokens when computing the metrics
    label_str = processor.batch_decode(pred.label_ids, group_tokens=False)

    wer = wer_metric.compute(predictions=pred_str, references=label_str)

    return {"wer": wer}
```

> Now, we can load the pretrained checkpoint of [`mms-1b-all`](https://huggingface.co/facebook/mms-1b-all). The tokenizer's `pad_token_id` must be to define the model's `pad_token_id` or in the case of `Wav2Vec2ForCTC` also CTC's *blank token* \(( {}^2 \)).

Reviewer 3: Previously we capitalised MMS-1B-ALL, here we lower case. I personally prefer lowercase for the mode id, but would just go with a consistent formatting across the blog

> Since, we're only training a small subset of weights, the model is not prone to overfitting. Therefore, we make sure to disable all dropout layers.

Reviewer 3: Nice!

```python
model.init_adapter_layers()
```

Next, we freeze all weights, **but** the adapter layers.

```python
model.freeze_base_model()

adapter_weights = model._get_adapters()
for param in adapter_weights.values():
    param.requires_grad = True
```

In a final step, we define all parameters related to training.
To give more explanation on some of the parameters:

-   `group_by_length` makes training more efficient by grouping training samples of similar input length into one batch. This can significantly speed up training time by heavily reducing the overall number of useless padding tokens that are passed through the model
-   `learning_rate` was chosen to be 1e-3 which is a common default value for training with Adam. Other learning rates might work equally well.

For more explanations on other parameters, one can take a look at the [docs](https://huggingface.co/transformers/master/main_classes/trainer.html?highlight=trainer#trainingarguments).

> To save GPU memory, we enable PyTorch's [gradient checkpointing](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/checkpoint.html) and also set the loss reduction to "*mean*".

Reviewer 3: We set the loss reduction to 'mean' in the config when we load the model - should we explain it there? Might not be so clear otherwise

> MMS adapter fine-tuning converges extremely fast to very good performance, so even for a dataset as small as 4h we will only train for 4 epochs. Training should

Reviewer 3: Flagging an incomplete sentence here (`Training should...`)

Now, all instances can be passed to Trainer and we are ready to start training!

```python
from transformers import Trainer

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    data_collator=data_collator,
    args=training_args,
    compute_metrics=compute_metrics,
    train_dataset=common_voice_train,
    eval_dataset=common_voice_test,
    tokenizer=processor.feature_extractor,
)
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\(( {}^1 \)) To allow models to become independent of the speaker rate, in CTC, consecutive tokens that are identical are simply grouped as a single token. However, the encoded labels should not be grouped when decoding since they don't correspond to the predicted tokens of the model, which is why the `group_tokens=False` parameter has to be passed. If we wouldn't pass this parameter a word like `"hello"` would incorrectly be encoded, and decoded as `"helo"`.

\(( {}^2 \)) The blank token allows the model to predict a word, such as `"hello"` by forcing it to insert the blank token between the two l's. A CTC-conform prediction of `"hello"` of our model would be `[PAD] [PAD] "h" "e" "e" "l" "l" [PAD] "l" "o" "o" [PAD]`.

### Training

> Training should take less than 30 minutes depending on the GPU used.

Reviewer 3: Fast!

```python
trainer.train()
```

| Training Loss | Training Steps | Validation Loss | Wer    |
|:-------------:|:----:|:---------------:|:------:|
| 4.905 |  100  | 0.215| 0.280 |
| 0.290 |  200  | 0.167 | 0.232 |
| 0.2659 |  300  | 0.161 | 0.229 |
| 0.2398 |  400  | 0.156 | 0.223 |

The training loss and validation WER go down nicely.

> **Note:** Fine-tuning adapter layers of `mms-1b-all` for just 100 steps outperforms fine-tuning the whole `xls-r-300m` checkpoint shown [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-xlsr-wav2vec2#training-1) already by a large margin.

Reviewer 3: Would be good IMO to compare the train time and memory as well to XLS-R -> think we can pitch this as a 'low-resource' way of fine-tuning for CTC (small GPU, fast time)
